---
layout: post
title: The Case for Kratom
---
Kratom (mitragyna speciosa) is a plant in the same family as coffee that is native to Southeast Asia. Kratom is notable for the opioid-like effects of its active ingredient, mitragynine, and its history of use as a painkiller in traditional medicine. Kratom has been the subject of controversy due to increased use as a replacement for more traditional opioids, and reports of toxicity, with the United States Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) having made an attempt to classify Kratom as a Schedule I drug on an emergency basis.

Though kratom has undergone minimal clinical study, one of the most frequently cited benefits of kratom by its users is its efficacy as a replacement for traditional illicit and prescription opioids. For example, a [survey](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0376871619301966) of approximately 3,000 kratom users found that “Respondents reported using kratom for conditions which often require use of opioids, including pain and reduction of opioid use. The high self-reported efficacy and low incidence of adverse reactions associated with kratom use suggest that it may provide a potential alternative to opioids for some persons.” Further, this study reported that over 90 percent of respondents noted kratom’s ability to reduce opioid usage and ease withdrawal symptoms.

Reports of kratom toxicity exist, however they consistently rely on misrepresentation of data, or fail to provide full context. As part of their rationale for the emergency scheduling of kratom, the DEA cited an increase in calls to poison control centers involving kratom. However, they failed to contextualize this increase. As explained by [Griffin and Webb](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02791072.2017.1371363) in the context of poison control centers, “calls for kratom would have represented roughly 0.000091% of all calls to poison control…, there were approximately 195.2 times more calls for alcohol than kratom, and even 12.4 times more calls for battery ingestion." In the few cases where kratom toxicity is reported, it is also [usually due to polysubstance use and not kratom alone.](https://accpjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/phar.2336)

In the context of the opioid crisis, in which users are [increasingly falling into opioid usage through prescription drugs](http://explore.bl.uk/primo_library/libweb/action/display.do?tabs=detailsTab&gathStatTab=true&ct=display&fn=search&doc=ETOCRN358424350&indx=1&recIds=ETOCRN358424350), we cannot afford to submit to drug hysteria and hinder the clinical study of alternative painkillers. Kratom (and substances like it) have the potential to save lives, and need to remain unscheduled, or at a minimum outside of Schedule I, in order for us to fully assess its therapeutic potential.
